the omega notation defines a lower bound of
a function
Let us say, our function is f(n) and
it grows like this when the size of the input
increases then what will be the lower bound of f(n)
We will find some other functions say g(n) in
such a way that c*g(n) is always
lesser than f(n)
For all the values of n greater than or equal
to n0. If we find any such function we
can say f(n) is omega of g(n)
that brings us to the definition of omega notation
The function f(n) is omega of g(n)
if and only if their excess positive constant c and n0
such that f(n) is greater than or equal
to c*g(n) for all n greater
than or equal to n0. Compared to big O notation
Only this symbol has changed
This was lesser than or equal to in big O notation
and here it is greater than or equal to.
So what does it mean Big O nnotation tells that
f(n) is always smaller than me whereas omega notation
tells that f(n) will always be greater
than me
Let us take the same example and find its omega
notation or the lower bound. f(n) is equal to
five n plus three
Let's put it in this equation
Five n plus three is greater than or equal to
c*g(n)
Now we need to guess the value for c*g(n)
such that f(n) is always greater than
c*g(n)
So we need to pick the smaller values of
c*g(n). Let us
take c as 1, g(n) as n and check
whether it satisfies this condition if we put c as 1,
g(n) as n, the equation will be
5n + 3 greater than or equal to 1*n
that is 5 + 3 greater than or equal
to n. Is this relation
true for all values of n? Yes, starting from n
equal to one,
This relation is true. Let us quickly verify it
If n = 1 this will become eight greater
than or equal to 1
That is true.
If n=2, this will become 13 greater than
or equal to 2.
And that is also true. Similarly if we take larger
values of n, 5n + 3 will always be greater
than n.
So we have found the value of n0 which
is 1 from that
we can say that 5n + 3 is greater
than or equal to n is true for all n
greater than or equal to one. So in the equation,
We have found the values of c, g(n) and
and n0 and it satisfies all the conditions of omega
definition
So we can say that five n plus three is
omega of n. Since this function is lower bound to
omega of n, this will lower bound to any time function
which is lesser than n, say square root of n, logn
and one etc.
But as we discussed earlier we should always take the
closest bound
Here the closest one is n, So that's why we
have returned as Omega of n and And thats it.
This is all about omega notation
In the next video let us learn about the theta notation.